the needs of people with cognitive
cognitive disability
like those with autism it's been the
final day of a public hearing by the
disability royal commission into the
education
and training of health professionals
disability affairs reporter naz
campanella has been following the
inquiry
we heard from toowoomba mum tony
mitchell and her son joshie today it is
not the first time they've come to the
royal commission
they actually gave evidence earlier this
year but today
when looking into the training and
education
for medical professionals they told the
royal commission
that they have often gone to emergency
departments
places where joshi feels quite
overwhelmed
and have often had to sit for up to
eight hours
and tony mitchell his mum was saying
that um
joshie who lives with down syndrome and
is also autistic
that many occasions doctors and nurses
haven't been able to see
past his visible disability that being
the down syndrome
and often overlook things like um that
might also be going on for joshi like
chronic pain
and other bits and pieces and she does
run training for example with the
toowoomba hospital once a year and she
really wants that training
to be extended across the country and
more regularly
she's also said that often she tries to
explain joshi's needs but she's often
dismissed as
just a mum that um doesn't doesn't know
what she's talking about and let's have
a little listen to what tony had to say
there's so many gaps in the services
um and in the training that
it's really important that disabilities
be covered
in more detail especially when
you know one in five people in our
population has a disability it should be
something that's
much more covered in their training
across the board not just doctors but
the nurses and allied health and
dentists
as well you know joshi went in for a
dental appointment at the hospital
and their way of holding him down was to
put their arm across his throat
and put him to the bed this isn't
appropriate and getting restraining
people with security guards coming in to
hold them down on the bed so tests can
be done
this isn't appropriate and it's not
acceptable
and better training and better
accommodations with people with
disabilities so they can be treated
without being hurt
and terrified is is
it has to get better it can't continue
the way it is
and so we mentioned that today is the
final day and as what happens now
so this is the final day for the
inquiries for the year they will be back
next year the first one
is going to be quite a long one it's
people with disabilities and their
interaction
with the justice system it'll be held in
february over eight days and then
there's going to be
a string of um other inquiries after
that things like education
and first nations people and also
the out of home care system a review of
medicare has found the system can
perpetuate
inefficiency and should be adapting to
meet the changing needs of
australia the help scheme was introduced
almost 40 years ago
and for the past five years it has been
under review by the medicare benefits
scheduled task force
gp dr louise stone is an associate
professor at anu medical school
and she joins me now good afternoon and
welcome to you
hello how are you i'm i'm well thank you
but the same can't be said for medicare
apparently according to this review a
gp's surprised by the findings showing
that medicare
itself is sick no not at all
gps have been struggling with medicare
for a long time now
one of the biggest issues for us is that
medicare has very specific
numbers which we use when patients have
procedures like
skin cancer removal for instance but for
patients who have complex and chronic
needs
for instance the patients with
disabilities we've just been talking
about
those patients receive less rebate from
medicare over
over time and so long consultations
time with patients longer and more
complex
interactions that we have with our
patients are less supported
well gps consulted under this five-year
review
yes we were but in a lot of ways one of
the difficulties we have is we have very
little data
so although we know that gps spend
certain amounts of time with patients we
actually don't know what occurs
within those consultations and that's
what we really need to understand
if we can better support gps who provide
complex and chronic care
can you give us an idea of how
that could be broken down for the
purposes
of reforming medicare so we've often
had a look at funding patients for their
disease
so we might look at patients for
instance who suffer from diabetes
patients with diabetes for instance we
could provide a block of funding where
those patients who
have diabetes as their only illness
could receive
a set of funding that then provides for
their podiatrist and their
eye specialist and their dietitian and
so on and that would work quite well
but it becomes more tricky when you
start looking at patients who might have
diabetes
and perhaps homelessness and perhaps
depression
perhaps intellectual disability when we
start mixing those things together it
becomes a lot more difficult for us to
work out
how we could fund those patients
appropriately and gps are very concerned
that
in the same way that medicare may not
provide for complex and chronic needs
perhaps in health reform we might not
recognize just how complex and chronic
some of those needs might be
how big is a problem if it is in your
view the fact that
both the commonwealth and states have
responsibilities in the health in the
health area
that's a chronic problem in general
practice because we're often trying to
bring patients into
particularly the public health system um
and we often
find that funding swaps from one place
to another so
we might be trying to bring patients in
to get outpatient appointments in the
public sector
coming into perhaps the public hospital
a public hospital will then try and move
those patients back out into general
practice
so it's one of the big difficulties that
we have helping patients navigate that
system
there's a cost to that chaos our poor
patients often are spending a lot of
time and energy but also resources in
things like child care and
missed employment perhaps in transport
trying to get around the hospital
network to get their needs met
and many of gps would assume that one of
the ways we could reform the system is
to bring some of their services out into
the community
instead of asking our patients to
navigate those systems in the hospitals
do you think the problems are
insurmountable
no i think healthcare providers are a
very
keen bunch and i've got to say that we
think quite creatively about why we do
what we do
but it is tricky as things become more
complex and certainly procedures and
opportunities for patients are becoming
more complex
there are more procedures available
there are more complex medication
regimes available
we have larger multi-disciplinary teams
can we do better of course we can but
what we really need to do i think
is to start collecting data and finding
out what patients
and carers and gps see where the gaps
are
so that we can navigate that system more
effectively for our patients
and so do you have hopes that this
review is going to be addressed within
the short term and
clearly you think it needs to be yeah i
certainly think it needs to be
i think in some areas it's a lot clearer
so if we look at
areas like eye specialties ophthalmology
for instance
i think there are a more limited range
of procedures and opportunities in that
space
when we look at general practice we
cover everything from social needs to
preventive care cradle to grave we call
it um taking little kids all the way up
to
elderly patients it's a lot more complex
in our space and i think we need more
information
in order to find out how best to meet
the needs of our patients
dr louise stone thank you for taking the
time to speak to us today we appreciate
it
you're welcome time for a look at what's
coming up on the drum
here's tonight's host catherine robinson
regulators around the world
are working to have covert vaccines
approved as soon as possible
in the uk and us vaccination has already
begun
the eu is hoping to start before the end
of the year
and a march 2021 rollout has been
promised for australia
so the question is who gets the vaccine
first and when
frontline workers old age pensioners and
prisoners
are all being put at the top of the list
we'll ask who else needs to be there
all that and more coming up on the drum
i'm katherine robinson see you then
and you can catch catherine and the drum
on abc tv tonight at 6 p.m local time
and at 9 00 pm eastern daylight time on
the abc news channel and of course
anytime
on iview the winner of this year's
archibald prize people's choice award
has been announced the painting of
kurdish iranian writer poet and
filmmaker bruce bashani was the clear
favourite
mr bushani was held on manus island for
six years
before being granted asylum by new
zealand
reporter sarah garethy spoke to the
artist angus mcdonald about what the win
means for him
more than 13 and a half thousand
visitors to this year's archibald prize
cast their vote for the people's choice
award but it was this portrait of
kurdish iranian burus buchani
that was most resonated with them i'm
here now with the artist six time
archibald finalist angus mcdonald
angus why did you decide to paint bruce
i'd known bruce for a couple of years
working on another project and i'd
ever since we met i'd always at the back
of my mind thought it would be great to
get interested for a portrait for me one
day
and so you went to new zealand he's now
been granted refugee status there after
being detained on manus island by the
australian government for
more than six years more than six years
uh so you went to new zealand
to sit with him and paint what what sort
of process was that like
well i went over for a week in february
uh just before covert started
uh i took my son with me and we spent a
week really just hanging out and talking
i really wanted to find out how he felt
after surviving that ordeal
and what he was thinking about in terms
of the future so those discussions and
that
time we had together which for me was so
wonderful
also helped me to decide how to depict
him and when you walk into the room and
you see this portrait i mean
it's really the stare the piercing stare
that first draws in so many people what
were you trying to capture
in in that look that he's giving the
viewer yeah he's got pretty amazing
eyes you know they can just bore right
through you um i think i
really wanted to depict uh buru's in the
way that he'd
uh discussed with me when i went to new
zealand how he felt and that was that
you know
uh one of his greatest achievements he
felt was that he'd survived this
ordeal and he was okay but also he was
confident and he was looking forward and
you know he's no longer a refugee you
know he's no longer someone held
offshore so for him this is a new
chapter i wanted to
him looking forward and looking out at
us okay and confident
and for you i mean you've been a
finalist six times in this um
in this archibald exhibition what does
it feel like to be
the winner of the people's choice award
to know that your work is resonating
with the people who come here to see the
exhibit
well i think that's you know to win the
people's choice is really the most
amazing
uh you know uh acknowledgement of the
work i mean if the public
is likes the work it's a massive
compliment i think it's uh it's
fantastic and i'm really thrilled to win
it burus was unable to be here today
obviously being in new zealand but
you've spoken to him what did he say
uh he's very happy as well i mean really
it's uh
you know if you think about this
portrait i've done at varus if you think
about uh
what an impact he's had uh in our recent
social history
uh you know this winning that prize is
really something that's shared between
him and i uh for me as an artist but i
think for him as someone
who has inspired so many people who's
earned the respect and admiration of so
many australians for his struggle and
his writing
so it's definitely a shared uh honor and
do you think that's part of the appeal
to to viewers
it's partly you know the work and the
way that it's painted but it's also his
story
uh i i really do think so i think bruce
is a bit of a lightning rod for people
i think he's been an inspiration to so
many people so
uh i'm i'm quite sure that
many people voted for this work uh
because of the way they feel about him
but hopefully also because they like the
painting
as well well congratulations and thanks
for talking to us thanks very much
time for the weather now with graham
creed and first up fiji
is under the threat of a category 5
cyclone grain
yes it is and we really expect to see
both islands or both main islands in
fact the entire
nation affected by this cyclone as it
moves through
now as i said by friday the whole of
fiji is expected to experience damaging
winds
or stronger sustained winds so that's
mean wind strength of 252 kilometers per
hour
at least so that's the minimum wind
strength of a category 5
cyclone there's widespread heavy rain
that's going to cause landslides severe
flooding
and river flooding storm surge
damaging heavy swells and high waves
that's going to also cause sea flooding
in coastal
areas we have widespread warnings out
for the country at the moment that
includes both the north and
southern maine island and most of the
smaller islands as well
now we're also seeing some significant
weather in new south wales
at the moment there's been some
localized heavy falls once again
particularly about parts of the north
and south coast
reports of well over 100 to 200
millimeters around lismore through this
afternoon with flash flooding in the
region
there's been falls in excess of 100
millimeters about the south coast
as well and this band moving through the
southern highlands
in through into the ranges west of
sydney is also producing
very heavy rainfall most of the state is
covered by a severe thunderstorm warming
and we are looking at the potential
flash flooding in association with this
activity
several areas of recorded falls around
50 to 100 millimeters over a one-hour
period so we are looking at significant
conditions through the state but it's
not just confined to new south wales
we have severe thunderstorm warnings
also in victoria for heavy rainfall
we're also looking at the potential of
some localized heavy falls through
queensland the northern territory has
also seen some heavy rainfall severe
thunderstorm warning up around the
northeastern corner
even areas to the west of darwin
recorded heavy falls
as we saw thunderstorms move through now
the monsoon trough is continuing to
develop across the top end of the
territory
we are going to see that continue to
deepen some heavy falls
anywhere through the top end over the
coming days and then as we move through
the latter part of the week a possible
low pressure system forming
on the monsoon trough very hot air
pushing into the inland parts of
queensland and new south wales
we are expecting wet conditions though
right down the east coast
and across the north of the country
you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.au
and on eyeview here are the top stories
on abc news
three household contacts of a man who's
tested positive for coronavirus have
tested negative the 45 year old works as
a van driver transporting international
airline crews to and from sydney airport
additional testing is being done to
confirm whether he caught the virus at
work
new south wales health says he did
attend a sporting event in peakhurst
while infectious the federal government
will appeal to the world trade
organisation over china's decision to
impose crippling tariffs
on australian bali earlier this year
china imposed levies of 80
in response to claims of dumping the
australian government and the
agricultural industry have repeatedly
denied allegations of anti-competitive
behaviour
multiple fire crews are trying to
control a major factory blaze in
brisbane's east
it broke out in a recycling warehouse in
gospel street at hammond
it quickly took hold the area has been
cordoned off
traffic diversions are in place
and ses crews are getting some respite
as weather conditions in northern new
south wales start to ease
the weather bureau has cancelled a
severe weather warning for the northern
rivers and mid north coast
but it has issued a severe thunderstorm
warning for much of
central and eastern new south wales
let's get more now on the massive
factory fire currently raging
in brisbane paramedics and fire crews
are on the scene
let's cross there now our reporter
jemima burt is standing by
jemima it looks enormous this blaze what
is its status
well kirsten as you as you said it's an
enormous fire um qfest is reporting that
there's been a massive roof collapse
um here in this industrial facility
which we understand
is a cardboard um and other sort of
white uh
paper recycling facility um so
qfest is on scene and there are a number
of officers and
firefighters up on cranes fighting the
fire so
there's about 16 different crews here
battling battling the blaze but
it's yet to be contained is it known how
the fire began
well kirsten there's no indication yet
of
how the fire began but we imagine that
that will come to light
as it's sort of put out and
investigations are finalized
any word of injuries
no injuries so far ambulance ambulances
are on scene
but no one has been reported as
significantly injured
all right jemima burt in brisbane thank
you
here is how australia's vaccination
strategy stands at the moment
the government is sticking to its march
rollout plans
it won't secure vaccine supply until
then but it does expect
three vaccines to be available those are
the pfizer moderna
and astrazeneca vaccines which are at
various stages of rollout and approval
by multiple countries
all three have shown extremely positive
late-stage testing results
the initial shipments of the approved
vaccine or vaccines will be offered in a
three-tiered system
first will be those at risk of dying if
they catch the disease that means anyone
aged 70 or
above all those with acute respiratory
illness
second frontline workers those in the
health and aged care sectors
third those deemed to be essential
workers
that's loosely defined as people crucial
to the ongoing stability of our society
people in the emergency services food
store operators
and school teachers overall the
government is hoping to have all
consenting
australians vaccinated by the end
of 2021 we're on track
things are working well it's very good
to see
international developments around the
fisa vaccine now being
given that emergency use authorization
in canada uk and the us and we're we're
looking
to see what the real world experience of
that
vaccine uh is as
it rolls out in those three countries
and of course we're in very close
contact with with those three countries
in particular and other
regulators around the world looking at
these new developments
when you think about how extraordinary
it it is it's only 11 months ago that we
had the first understanding of the
genetic sequence of this
of this virus and now we already have
the fisa vaccine out in the field being
being
used in in priority populations in those
three countries
as well as now the likelihood that
moderna
another mrna vaccine will
may well get an emergency use
authorisation in coming days
we've had the first trial results of the
astrazeneca vaccine which is being made
here in australia
in melbourne right now and and that's
also looking promising our
aim for 2021 is to have anyone in
australia
who wants to get this vaccine vaccinated
and so yes there will be a cue this is
an unusual
event the u.s food and drug
administration has approved the first
over-the-counter rapid covert test and
it's a brisbane company
producing it here is sean parsons the
ceo of the loom which is making the test
good afternoon
and welcome to you yeah good afternoon
thank you for having me
you must be delighted to have received
this emergency use authorization
is your test going to have a significant
effect
on combating the u.s pandemic
yes it will that's um that's what we've
been working at these months to
to create this product to be able to
scale it on the production side here in
australia
and then take it to the us the objective
is to test as many people as we can and
to enable
better self-isolation on the back of the
results of the test
to really prevent as many people from
contracting the disease
and transmitting the disease between now
and when
the us in particular can be vaccinated
take us through exactly how it works and
how long it takes
for results to become available
yeah so the test works in conjunction
with an app which is downloaded by the
user
the app walks through how to use the
test step by step
it involves involves a short video
and then a series of instructions on how
to take a swap swab
the sample is then applied to a
bluetooth analyzer which all comes as
part of the kit
the analyzer does all of the the
processing and analysis of the of the
test sample
and then the result is bluetooth into
your phone so
it's designed to be very simple to use
it's gone through extensive
testing uh in the clinical trials but
also in usability studies as required by
the fda
and we're very confident that people
will be able to take a swab
and obtain a reliable result from using
the test well can you just talk us
through
how reliable is the test and are people
giving it to themselves that sounds a
little bit difficult
uh yes it's not as difficult as it might
sound the instructions walk you through
how to do that
and we're confident that untrained users
can do it correctly
it does involve taking a mid turbine
swab which is is not
the back of your the back of your nose
as
most of the samples are being taken here
in australia
it's a what we call a mid turbine which
is the the middle part
um and the results of the test really
speak for themselves 96
accuracy in the clinical trial which we
ran
in the us ahead of fda authorisation
is it up to the person taking the test
what they do with the result for
instance if they record a positive
result
could they decide to keep that
information to themselves
yes it is it's up to people to decide
what they what they do with that result
and how they change their behavior
that said for the most part we we see
people as very interested in trying to
obtain
information about what's making them
sick um or if they're screening
themselves they want to know if they are
actually infected with coronavirus so we
see the test is providing
the best possible information to people
in those circumstances so they can make
the best
healthcare decisions they can are you
seeking approval for this
test to be used here in australia
no the main focus is the us the
secondary focus will be europe which
will come through the middle of next
year
australia has a different challenge with
coronavirus we
we need to catch every single case and
our laboratory and hospital systems are
able to keep up with the current testing
demand
so um so what australia needs is a
little different to the
the needs of you know the us uk central
europe
despite the very different situation
with coronavirus here in australia there
has been a suggestion
this afternoon from the respected
epidemiologist professor mary louise
mcclause
that such a test could indeed be used in
and around our airports
where we did see a positive case
recorded
overnight have you been in any
discussions with authorities here about
the potential availability
of your test no
significant discussions with the
authorities here in australia
the the main focus of loom and the
utility of
of our product is really the us at the
moment
we did receive significant funding from
the u.s
national institutes of health through
their radix program which is
designed to support new technologies and
diagnostics and
on the back of that 42 million dollar
investment one of the assurances we made
was that
the products that we manufacture um here
in brisbane
will be shipped to the us so there is an
understanding that
um that what we make certainly for the
time being will be used
to help america respond to this
coronavirus pandemic and how many tests
will you be producing to export
so first shipments are planned for the
first week of january um we'll be at 100
000 tests a day
before january is out our current
facility will
reach its maximum capacity at about 250
000 tests a day
we think the demand is significantly
greater than that and we are exploring
uh our options to further ramp that
production
uh well beyond a quarter million tests
daily sean parsons
really interesting to speak to you thank
you thanks a lot
victoria's attorney general jill
hennessy has announced she's stepping
down from her ministerial role to spend
more time with her family the labour mp
will stay on as the member for altona
district
and has confirmed she'll contest the
next state election the premier daniel
andrews says ms hennessey has made a
courageous choice
and he supports her decision
tasmania is further easing covert
restrictions
from monday theaters and cinemas will be
allowed to operate at 75
capacity and from next year outdoor
sporting events can host crowds of up to
75 capacity as well the premier peter
guttmann has also announced a relaxing
of restrictions on religious services
over the holiday period church services
and other religious services to go
beyond their current density cap
to 75 of the seated capacity
for christmas uh and other religious
services
uh over this coming period that will
commence this sunday
with an exemption to remain in place to
allow this to occur until the following
sunday the 27th
of december we will then
review those arrangements and have a
look at matters moving forward
i would remind people to continue to do
the right thing
make certain that you appropriately
socially distance
during the holiday period make sure that
you wash your hands regularly that you
cover your coughs and sneezes
importantly and i will stress this over
and over again
stay home if you are unwell you know
please don't think that you need to go
to a christmas gathering just because
it's christmas
if you're not feeling well do the right
thing it is so important this year
meanwhile south australia has also eased
restrictions
that state is scrapping its border
checkpoints and scaling back coronavirus
checks at adelaide airport
the police commissioner grant stevens
says he's made the decision
because he's confident covert 19 has
virtually been eliminated from the
community in australia
and residents of an apartment complex in
canberra have been told to evacuate
immediately
over concerns about the building's fire
safety reporter isaac naruzi has the
details
residents of the kalkia apartments here
in the canberra suburb of macquarie
have been told to evacuate due to safety
concerns
that could lead to a rapid collapse of
the apartment complex
in case of a fire now we understand that
that is due to pillars in the
underground car park those pillars are
supposed to have a fire safety rating
of 60 minutes and instead they have a
fire safety rating
of zero which means that residents will
have no time to evacuate
if there is a fire now it's important to
note that
the strata managers of the building are
the ones
that have put out the evacuation order
but they have no power to evacuate the
building
the act government on the other hand has
given different advice
as late as yesterday our understanding
was that evacuation would not be
required but there was needed there was
the need to do some things such as
refrain from using the basement
the notice that's been provided by the
owners corporation
has taken us a little bit by surprise
it's not the first time madison
constructions which is the construction
company
that built the apartment complex behind
me has been in trouble
for the kilcare apartment so last year
they were summoned to court for
allegedly failing to comply
with rectification order on some
cosmetic issues now that work still
hasn't been done
and they're due back in court next month
now
madison construction no longer has a
license to build in the act
but the problem is the act government
can't force them to do anything and
that's because
the window to do so closes 10 years
after a building occupancy certificate
has been granted and this building was
granted one
12 years ago the act government says it
is
looking at changing that law heavy rain
and abnormally high tides have washed
away much of the sand at byron bays at
main beach on the new south wales north
coast
reporter bronwyn herbert has more look
the rain has eased and there is a sliver
of sunshine
here in byron bay the bureau of
meteorology recently
downgraded the severe weather warning
for across the northern rivers but there
are still
isolated thunderstorms around the region
which is already so drenched after days
of
flooding rains just behind me is bolondo
beach which has
really copped a thrashing in the past
few days with these storms
a combination of the heavy rain gale
force winds and
king tides long-term residents say that
this erosion is the worst they've seen
in their lifetime
and up to two meters of sand has been
eroded here
now flood warnings are still in place
across the northern rivers there's
a minor flood warning still in place for
the wilson's river near lismore
uh there is likely to be a moderate peak
today
later this afternoon the richmond river
at
korokai and also affecting the
communities of bunga woburn and
woodburn and a minor flood alert further
south in the clarence valley
evacuation centers are opening across
fiji as a powerful cyclone heads towards
it
bringing destructive winds possible
flash flooding and landslides
cyclone yasser is currently to the north
west of fiji it is expected to pass
directly over the country on friday
sharana ali is the ceo of save the
children
fiji and she joins me now thank you
very much for your time what are
conditions like at the moment
thank you christian and good evening to
you
according to the latest reports from the
fiji meteorological services
there is a prediction that category five
tropical cyclone yasa will
pass very close to or over the main
island of vithi level
later tomorrow afternoon so in terms of
preparation
reparations at the moment the fiji
police force is mobilizing communities
to evacuate as soon as possible
we are already experiencing heavy rain
in most parts of the country
ratuma and the yasawa islands is already
experiencing the
effects of tropical cyclone yasa
and at the moment the advice from the
fiji government and the national
disaster management office is to prepare
and for those living in vulnerable
communities especially those in informal
settlements
they've been asked to evacuate to the
nearest evacuation center
hundreds of thousands of fiji's
residents are said to be
in this cyclone's path do you
understand that most are taking this
seriously and that the move to
evacuation centers is well and truly
underway
yes if you look at the latest
information coming out from the world
food program and their analysis
actually over a little over 800 000
people
are going to be impacted directly from
this particular tropical cyclone so
in terms of preparedness again people
are taking this
the warnings quite seriously we've seen
people
stocking up on essential food items and
supplies
and people are stocking up on water
because there is a warning from
the fiji water authority that people
will not have a
proper water supply for at least 10 days
so people are actually preparing quite
well at the moment
there have been forecasts that both main
islands
could be extensively damaged by this
cyclone
how difficult would that make it to
respond
in terms of response so the national
disaster management office
has activated all the emergency
operation centers in each of the
divisions
and the emergency operations centers are
working very closely together with the
first responders that is the fiji police
force
other civil society organizations
including save the children fiji
the red cross society and other
organizations who are part of the first
response within the next um after
immediately after
um tropical cyclone yeah surpasses the
country
can you bring us up to date with covert
in fiji is the pandemic likely to affect
any help that the country
might need from overseas
our borders are still closed and
this will pose some challenges
especially if we are looking at
procuring items for distribution
um i did come out of the pacific
humanitarian team meeting earlier this
afternoon
and at the moment we are still assessing
um each organization's capability in
terms of how much
pre-position stock each organization has
to contribute to the initial response
so in terms of kovid 19 again the
borders are closed and i think
the parliament would need to make a
decision about you know mobilizing
additional support where required
sharana ali from save the children fiji
thank you for taking time out to speak
to us we will keep in touch with you
over the coming days
thank you very much now let's talk
sports news with tony
armstrong in melbourne hello again to
you tony a big name is leaving the
melbourne storm
yeah kirsten that's right the man known
affectionately as the fox josh ada carr
it's been announced this afternoon that
he has signed on with the canterbury
bulldogs
on a four-year deal that will commence
at the start of the 2022
season that'll take him through to the
end of 2025. now he's been pursuing
a release for a little while now for
about 12 months on compassionate grounds
from the storm and it looked like he was
perhaps going to sign with the west
tigers however that deal
fell over and then the bulldogs pounced
so the four-year deal
um gets up there he'll play from 2022 to
til 20 25 i got there in the end and um
we're gonna miss him down here in
melbourne that's for sure
now the first test against india starts
tomorrow but we still don't know who
made it into the australian team
no so there's obviously been a lot of
conjecture as to who's going to open the
batting for australia
there's a lot of reports coming out that
haven't been verified that joe burns is
going to be opening
with matthew wade but we're still
waiting to hear officially from the
australian camp cameron green
he looks certain to make his debut at
only 21 years old and steve smith
there's a little bit of a worry about
him he did bat today in the nets
this is what tim tim payne had to say
about his availability before
tomorrow's test you expect steve to be
there steve's had to step back
um a number of times before and you do
when you're bad at that training as much
as
as he does but um look he's preparation
has been
very good he's batted for the last week
since we've been in adelaide so
for him to have a day off might actually
be a blessing in disguise yesterday
tony what happened in the big bash last
night well the hobart hurricane took on
the adelaide strikers but it was the
peter siddal show he wound back the
clock taking
5 for 16 off 3.3 overs the hurricanes
they made 146 and that was chased down
relatively easy by the strikers they
reached the total
in the 19th over jake weatherworld
scored 68
not out and alex kerry made a nice 55
but
you've got to talk about peter siddall
he uh he's got the electric shock
blonde hair and he's taken a fire for
it's great to see awesome
now there are some finals on tonight the
wnbl
yes there are so the semi-finals are
played tonight the first match
starts in a matter of minutes the uc
capitals will take on
the melbourne boomers that's a must-win
bout
if the uc capitals are to get over the
boomers they go through to play the
loser of the south side flyers
and the townsville fire who finished
first and second the winner of that
match
goes straight through to the grand final
you'd have to say going into this
final series the south side flyers are
favorites they come in
having won their last seven in a row by
a margin of
24 and a half points and they've got the
great liz cam beige as well playing for
them too so they're my tip
to win the premiership okay thanks tony
no worries
let's check the weather again with
graham and fiji is under threat from a
category five cyclone graham yes there's
been no change
in the warnings or the strength of this
system so unfortunately it looks as i
will do a direct hit in fiji overnight
thursday
and early friday now by friday the whole
of fiji is expected to
experience damage from this system it's
likely to bring sustained winds
of 252 kilometers per hour minimum so
that's the minimum wind strength for a
category 5
cyclone we're going to see widespread
heavy rain that's going to cause
landslides severe flooding
and it'll burst riverbanks there's a
storm surge damaging
and heavy swells and high waves and
that's all going to cause sea flooding
particularly in the more coastal areas
so some extremely dangerous conditions
on the way there they've also got flash
flooding possible through quite large
areas of the continent now particularly
in new south wales where we have seen
some exceptionally heavy rainfall
in association with thunderstorms parts
of the north coast once again around
lismore have recorded in excess of 200
millimeters so far since
9am there was a severe weather warning
with heavy falls about the south coast
but these bands